Draft 2.15 release notes (#10165)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/release-notes/v2.15.md

- `-alertmanager.alertmanager-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ingester.client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-querier.frontend-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-querier.scheduler-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-query-frontend.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-query-scheduler.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ruler.client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ruler.query-frontend.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`

Distributors now support `lz4` OTLP compression, and can be deployed in multiple availability zones.

The ruler's `<prometheus-http-prefix>/api/v1/rules` endpoint now supports `exclude_alerts`, `group_limit`, and `group_next_token` parameters.

mimirtool's analyze ruler/prometheus commands now support bearer tokens.

HTTP client settings can now be tuned for GCS and Azure backends via an `http` block or corresponding CLI flags.

The compactor now refreshes deletion marks concurrently when updating the bucket index.

The number of Memcached replicas for each type of cache can now be set using configuration settings when using jsonnet.

## Important changes

In Grafana Mimir 2.15, the following behavior has changed:

> The following alertmanager metrics are not exported for a `user` when the metric value is zero:

Reviewer: The `user` here refers to a label, right?

```suggestion
The following alertmanager metrics are not exported for a `user` label when the metric value is zero:
```

- `cortex_alertmanager_state_replication_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_state_replication_failed_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_alerts`
- `cortex_alertmanager_silences`

PromQL compatibility has been upgraded from Prometheus 2.0 to 3.0. More details can be found in the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/3.0/migration/#promql). The following changes are of note:

- The `.` pattern in regular expressions in PromQL now matches newline characters.
- Lookback and range selectors are left open and right closed (previously left closed and right closed).
- Native histograms now use exponential interpolation.

Backwards compatibility in dashboards and alerts for `thanos_memcached_`-prefixed metrics has been removed. These metrics were removed in 2.12 in favor of `thanos_cache_`-prefixed metrics.

Support for Redis as a cache backend has been removed from jsonnet.

The following deprecated configuration options were removed in this release:

- `-distributor.direct-otlp-translation-enabled`, which has been enabled by default since 2.13 and is now considered stable.
- `-query-scheduler.prioritize-query-components`, which is always enabled now

> - `-ingest-storage.kafka.ongoing-records-per-fetch` and `-ingest-storage.kafka.startup-records-per-fetch`, which have been removed in favour of `-ingest-storage.kafka.max-buffered-bytes`

Reviewer: Everything about `ingest-storage` is still experimental and we skip mentioning it. I think, we can drop this one from the notes:

```suggestion
```

## Experimental features

Grafana Mimir 2.15 includes some features that are experimental and disabled by default.
Use these features with caution and report any issues that you encounter:

> Mimir's experimental PromQL engine can now be enabled with `-querier.query-engine=mimir`. This new engine provides improved performance and reduced querier resource consumption; however, it supports only a subset of all PromQL features. IT will fall back to Prometheus' engine for queries containing unsupported features.

Reviewer: (nit)

```suggestion
Mimir's experimental PromQL engine can now be enabled with `-querier.query-engine=mimir`. This new engine provides improved performance and reduced querier resource consumption. However, it supports only a subset of all PromQL features; queries containing unsupported features fall back to regular Prometheus engine.
```

---
title: "Grafana Mimir version 2.15 release notes"
menuTitle: "V2.15 release notes"
description: "Release notes for Grafana Mimir version 2.15"
weight: 1100
---

# Grafana Mimir version 2.15 release notes

<!-- vale Grafana.GoogleWill = NO -->
<!-- vale Grafana.Timeless = NO -->
<!-- Release notes are often future focused -->

Grafana Labs is excited to announce version 2.15 of Grafana Mimir.

The highlights that follow include the top features, enhancements, and bug fixes in this release.
For the complete list of changes, refer to the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).

## Features and enhancements

S2 compression for gRPC is now supported using the following flags:

- `-alertmanager.alertmanager-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ingester.client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-querier.frontend-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-querier.scheduler-client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-query-frontend.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-query-scheduler.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ruler.client.grpc-compression=s2`
- `-ruler.query-frontend.grpc-client-config.grpc-compression=s2`

> Distributors now support `lz4` OTLP compression, and can be deployed in multiple availability zones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Distributors now support `lz4` OTLP compression, and you can deploy them in multiple availability zones.
```

Reviewer 2: We can make this active voice.

> The ruler's `<prometheus-http-prefix>/api/v1/rules` endpoint now supports `exclude_alerts`, `group_limit`, and `group_next_token` parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ruler's `<prometheus-http-prefix>/api/v1/rules` endpoint now supports the `exclude_alerts`, `group_limit`, and `group_next_token` parameters.
```

> mimirtool's analyze ruler/prometheus commands now support bearer tokens.

Reviewer 2: Could we say `analyze ruler and Prometheus commands` instead?

Reviewer 2: That sounds really good!

> HTTP client settings can now be tuned for GCS and Azure backends via an `http` block or corresponding CLI flags.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now tune HTTP client settings for GCS and Azure backends via an `http` block or corresponding CLI flags.
```

The compactor now refreshes deletion marks concurrently when updating the bucket index.

> The number of Memcached replicas can now be independently set for each type of cache.

Reviewer 3: If this is in reference to #9679, it'd be more accurate to say
```suggestion
The number of Memcached replicas for each type of cache can now be set using configuration settings when using jsonnet.
```

> The number of Memcached replicas for each type of cache can now be set using configuration settings when using jsonnet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now set the number of Memcached replicas for each type of cache using configuration settings when using jsonnet.
```

## Important changes

In Grafana Mimir 2.15, the following behavior has changed:

The following alertmanager metrics are not exported for a `user` when the metric value is zero:

- `cortex_alertmanager_alerts_received_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_alerts_invalid_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_partial_state_merges_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_partial_state_merges_failed_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_state_replication_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_state_replication_failed_total`
- `cortex_alertmanager_alerts`
- `cortex_alertmanager_silences`

> PromQL compatibility has been upgraded from Prometheus 2.0 to 3.0. The following has changed as a result:

Reviewer 3: Is there a Prometheus doc we can link to here that explains these in more detail?

Author: Maybe [this](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/3.0/migration/#promql). The native histograms change isn't mentioned on that page, though, afaict.

> PromQL compatibility has been upgraded from Prometheus 2.0 to 3.0. More details can be found in the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/3.0/migration/#promql). The following changes are of note:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PromQL compatibility has been upgraded from Prometheus 2.0 to 3.0. For more details, refer to the [Prometheus documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/3.0/migration/#promql). The following changes are of note:
```

- The `.` pattern in regular expressions in PromQL now matches newline characters.

> - Lookback and range selectors are left open and right closed (previously left closed and right closed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Lookback and range selectors are left-open and right-closed. They were previously left-closed and right-closed.
```

- Native histograms now use exponential interpolation.

Backwards compatibility in dashboards and alerts for `thanos_memcached_`-prefixed metrics has been removed. These metrics were removed in 2.12 in favor of `thanos_cache_`-prefixed metrics.

Support for Redis as a cache backend has been removed from jsonnet.

The following deprecated configuration options were removed in this release:

- `-distributor.direct-otlp-translation-enabled`, which has been enabled by default since 2.13 and is now considered stable.

> - `query-scheduler.prioritize-query-components`, which is always enabled now

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `-query-scheduler.prioritize-query-components`, which is always enabled now
```

> - `-query-scheduler.prioritize-query-components`, which is always enabled now

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `-query-scheduler.prioritize-query-components`, which is now always enabled.
```

> - `-ingest-storage.kafka.ongoing-records-per-fetch` and `-ingest-storage.kafka.startup-records-per-fetch`, which have been removed in favour of `-ingest-storage.kafka.max-buffered-bytes`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `-ingest-storage.kafka.ongoing-records-per-fetch` and `-ingest-storage.kafka.startup-records-per-fetch`, which have been removed in favor of `-ingest-storage.kafka.max-buffered-bytes`.
```

## Experimental features

Grafana Mimir 2.15 includes some features that are experimental and disabled by default.
Use these features with caution and report any issues that you encounter:

A streaming PromQL engine can now be enabled with `-querier.query-engine=mimir`.

> The query-frontend can now cache non-transient errors using the experimental flags `query-frontend.cache-errors` and `query-frontend.results-cache-ttl-for-errors`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The query-frontend can now cache non-transient errors using the experimental flags `-query-frontend.cache-errors` and `-query-frontend.results-cache-ttl-for-errors`.
```

> Mimir's experimental PromQL engine can now be enabled with `-querier.query-engine=mimir`. This new engine provides improved performance and reduced querier resource consumption; however, it supports only a subset of all PromQL features. It will fall back to Prometheus' engine for queries containing unsupported features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now enable Mimir's experimental PromQL engine with `-querier.query-engine=mimir`. This engine provides improved performance and reduced querier resource consumption. However, it only supports a subset of all PromQL features. It falls back to Prometheus' engine for queries containing unsupported features.
```

> The query-frontend and querier both support an experimental PromQL function, `double_exponential_smoothing`, which can be enabled by setting `-querier.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true` or `-query-frontend.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true`.

Reviewer 4: [nit] The "or" makes it sound like a user can set either of these and they'll have the same effect, but my understanding is that both need to be set for this to work properly.

```suggestion
The query-frontend and querier both support an experimental PromQL function, `double_exponential_smoothing`, which can be enabled by setting `-querier.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true` and `-query-frontend.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true`.
```

> The query-frontend can now cache non-transient errors using the experimental flags `-query-frontend.cache-errors` and `-query-frontend.results-cache-ttl-for-errors`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now use the query-frontend can to cache non-transient errors using the experimental flags `-query-frontend.cache-errors` and `-query-frontend.results-cache-ttl-for-errors`.
```

The ingester can now support out-of-order native histogram ingestion via the flag `-ingester.ooo-native-histograms-ingestion-enabled`.

> The ingester can now build 24h blocks for OOO data which is >24h old, using the setting `-blocks-storage.tsdb.bigger-out-of-order-blocks-for-old-samples`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ingester can now build 24h blocks for out-of-order data which is >24h old, using the setting `-blocks-storage.tsdb.bigger-out-of-order-blocks-for-old-samples`.
```

> The query-frontend and querier both support an experimental PromQL function, `double_exponential_smoothing`, which can be enabled by setting `-querier.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true` and `-query-frontend.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The query-frontend and querier both support an experimental PromQL function, `double_exponential_smoothing`, which you can enable by setting `-querier.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true` and `-query-frontend.promql-experimental-functions-enabled=true`.
```

> The ingester can now support out-of-order native histogram ingestion via the flag `-ingester.ooo-native-histograms-ingestion-enabled`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ingester now supports out-of-order native histogram ingestion via the flag `-ingester.ooo-native-histograms-ingestion-enabled`.
```

> The ingester can now build 24h blocks for out-of-order data which is >24h old, using the setting `-blocks-storage.tsdb.bigger-out-of-order-blocks-for-old-samples`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ingester can now build 24h blocks for out-of-order data which is more than 24 hours old, using the setting `-blocks-storage.tsdb.bigger-out-of-order-blocks-for-old-samples`.
```

The ruler now supports caching the contents of rule groups via the setting `-ruler-storage.cache.rule-group-enabled`.

The distributor now supports promotion of OTel resource attributes to labels via the setting `-distributor.promote-otel-resource-attributes`.

## Bug fixes

- Alerts: Fix autoscaling metrics joins in `MimirAutoscalerNotActive` when series churn.
- Alerts: Exclude failed cache "add" operations from alerting since failures are expected in normal operation.
- Alerts: Exclude read-only replicas from `IngesterInstanceHasNoTenants` alert.
- Alerts: Use resident set memory for the `EtcdAllocatingTooMuchMemory` alert so that ephemeral file cache memory doesn't cause the alert to misfire.
- Dashboards: Fix autoscaling metrics joins when series churn.
- Distributor: Fix pooling buffer reuse logic when `-distributor.max-request-pool-buffer-size` is set.
- Ingester: Fix issue where active series requests error when encountering a stale posting.
- Ingester: Fix race condition in per-tenant TSDB creation.
- Ingester: Fix race condition in exemplar adding.
- Ingester: Fix race condition in native histogram appending.

> - Ingester: Fix bug in concurrent fetching where a failure to list topics on startup would cause to use an invalid topic ID (0x00000000000000000000000000000000).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ingester: Fix bug in concurrent fetching where a failure to list topics on startup would cause an invalid topic ID (0x00000000000000000000000000000000).
```

- Ingester: Fix bug where chunks could have one unnecessary zero byte at the end.
- OTLP: Support integer exemplar value type.
- OTLP receiver: Preserve colons and combine multiple consecutive underscores into one when generating metric names in suffix adding mode (`-distributor.otel-metric-suffixes-enabled`).
- Prometheus: Fix issue where negation of native histograms (e.g. `-some_native_histogram_series`) did nothing.
- Prometheus: Always return unknown hint for first sample in non-gauge native histograms chunk to avoid incorrect counter reset hints when merging chunks from different sources.
- Prometheus: Ensure native histograms counter reset hints are corrected when merging results from different sources.
- PromQL: Fix issue where functions such as `rate()` over native histograms could return incorrect values if a float stale marker was present in the selected range.
- PromQL: `round` now removes the metric name again.
- PromQL: Fix issue where `metric might not be a counter, name does not end in _total/_sum/_count/_bucket` annotation would be emitted even if `rate` or `increase` did not have enough samples to compute a result.

> - Querier: Fix the behaviour of binary operators between native histograms and floats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Querier: Fix the behavior of binary operators between native histograms and floats.
```

- Query-frontend: Fix issue where sharded queries could return annotations with incorrect or confusing position information.
- Query-frontend: Fix issue where downstream consumers may not generate correct cache keys for experimental error caching.

> - Query-frontend: Fix `QueryFrontendCodec` module initialization to set lookback delta from `-querier.lookback-delta`.

Reviewer 4: Is this relevant to users? Seems very technical.

Author: I've removed it -- it looked like the 2.14 notes erred on the side of keeping more bugfixes with very short descriptions, so I followed suit, but I'm not super opinionated about that, and since it falls back to the default value if unset, most users probably don't notice.

> - Querier: Fix stddev+stdvar aggregations to always ignore native histograms, and to treat Infinity consistently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Querier: Fix stddev+stdvar aggregations to always ignore native histograms and to treat infinity consistently.
```

Author: I'm torn on this; IIUC histograms use `+Inf` to denote infinity; if it's capitalized in that context, should it be capitalized here?
